Bitwise operators.
This is one of the interesting topics.
These operations are performed on the bits of the data, not on the whole data as a single unit, but
on the bits of the data.
Let us see what are the operations available?
See, bitwise and bitwise are and bitwise x are.
Our Czar and the bitwise not left to shift and ride shift.
Let me quickly show you how these operations work.
See if there are two bits, a bit of one and a bit to two bits are there.
And if both the bits are zero, then.
Baked one and bitter two will also be zero.
And if any one of the bidders won, then also it is zero.
If this is zero, this is one, then also zero.
And if both are one, then it is one.
So it is just like logical.
And so when you use bitwise ending, it will be one.
If both the bids are one, then if I say or then this will be one if any one of the bidders one.
See, this is one.
So answer is one out of these two bids this is one.
So answer is one or both are one.
So the answer is one.
Then if it is X or this one, then.
If both the bids are different, then only it will be one.
Both the bids are same, then it will be zero.
Exclusive or means exclusively with one is a one.
Then the other bid must be zero.
Or if one bet is zero, then the other bid must be definitely one.
So this is XOR not means whatever the bid is there.
If it is one it will become zero.
If it is zero, it will become one.
Then this.
Let us learn all these operations by using examples.
While explaining that, I'll also explain about the shift operations.
If I have integer variable x and the value is 11.
And the Y value is five.
Now these two integer variables I have taken.
We know that these numbers are actually stored in the binary form.
So what will be the value of X in the binary form?
11 minus one 011.
If I say integer takes two bytes, then it will be total 16 bits.
So four bits are there.
Then the remaining all bits will be zero only.
But I will not write all 16.
But I'll just write eight bits here then.
Same way y value five it is 101 and the remaining bits are all zeros.
So let us understand this upon eight bits only.
And if I use an operation now and try to store the result in one more variable z, let me see what happens
if I say that assign x and y, then these bits are n one and one is 1110 is zero zero and one is 0110
is also zero.
So this will be one.
So binary form it is one.
So Z will get the value of one.
So this is how bitwise ending is performed.
So if you add 11 and five, then the result is one.
I'll change the value instead of five I will take seven.
Let us see what will be the result.
Seven is 111.
Then what will be the result?
111111110 and 101 and zero zero and all these are zeros only then this is how much in binary form this
is one one.
So in decimal form it will be three.
So 11 and seven.
Results three Let us see what will be the result of our operation.
So I will take x 11 only and why seven then instead of and I will use our operation then the result
will be one or one as one.
One or one is one zero or one is also one.
One or zero is also one.
And all these are zeros only.
Then this is in the binary form it is one one, one one.
So in decimal it is 15, 11 or seven is 15.
So it is not like addition or subtraction directly.
You look at the value and give the answer.
Unless you perform some bitwise operations, you cannot get the answer.
If you have some practice on this one, then you may be able to directly give the answer by looking
at them.
Now, next, let us see what is the result of XOR this XOR operation I will take.
Both are same zero, both are same zero.
These two are different one.
Then leading all are zeros.
So this is 12.
Rather it is two in decimal form.
This is two and see this is one, two, four, eight, eight plus four as well.
So the answer is 12.
Here, let us look at not I will take a character type variable X with value five and also one variable
Y character takes just one byte in C++.
So this X in the binary form it will be five is 101 and remaining all bets are zeros.
So this is the binary form of five.
Then if I say y assign not of x, then let us see what happens.
Not means every binary, but it will change its state.
That is zero will become one.
One will become zero.
So this becomes a zero and one and zero.
Then all these are ones.
So this is the complement or the note of x.
Now as this bit is a sign word.
So this is one now.
So it means the number is negative.
The negative numbers in C++ are represented in TOS complement form.
If you want to get the positive value of it, then again you have to take TOS complement and you get
the positive value.
So it is a negative number.
Then what is the value in decimal form?
So to know the value in decimal form I should convert it to two complement.
Then I can get the value.
So let us convert into twos complement.
First convert zeros to once and once to zero.
So this is 00000101.
Then add one to this number.
So one plus one is two.
That is zero.
Carry one and this is one and this is one, then 00000.
Then how much does this six.
So this is a negative six.
So not off fivers minus six.
Now, before going further, let us put a question here.
Where do you need this?
If you are developing devices, drivers, or if you are developing core system programs or system applications
or tools, then there you may be working more closer to electronics.
And these are the operations in electronics.
So your C program, also, you want it to perform those type of operations.
Your logic itself is defined in terms of bit operations.
So then you can use this operators there for adding your procedures.
So if you are writing hardware based or device drivers there, it is useful.
Now, let me show what does it mean by lift shift and write shift?
I will take the value of X as a five and y.
So in binary form five is 101.
So leading all 16 bits as zeros remaining, the bits are zeros.
So I will just add eight here.
I will write just eight bits here.
This is x left to shift two by one and I want to show the result and y then this bit is shifted here.
So this is one and this is shifted here zero.
This is shifted here one and all these bits are shifted to the side.
So remaining five bits.
I shifted the side.
This place is vacant now, so here zero is inserted.
Now, how much is this?
This is one, two, four, eight.
So this is eight plus two.
This is ten.
So actually, what has happened is when you shift all these bids on the left hand side by one space,
then this five will get multiplied by two.
If you move them by two space, then it will get multiplied by four.
So it is just like whatever the value of X is, this will get multiplied by two power.
Whatever the number you write here, whatever the number you write.
So if I say x left shift I then this will be X into two part II.
So if it is one, then it is multiplied by two.
If I is a two, then x will be multiplied by four and so on.
Now similarly, if right shift is used, then if I say x right shift by I, then x will get divided
by two, right?
So if five five will get half, that is a two integer division.
If it is a ten, it will become five.
So the number will become half.
If you write shift by one place, if it is done by two place, then it is divided by quarter.
That is four.
It will convert into quarter, that is divided by four.
But one thing you remember here sign but is not included.
The most significant bet.
If the number is negative, it remains negative.
Only if it is positive, remain positive only sine but is not a disturbed and left and right set of
reactions.
Let us see this practically by writing some program.